1. What the data looked like

The dataset has:

569 observations
target variable: diagnosis
B = benign
M = malignant
one identifier column id
one extra empty column that gets dropped if present
about 30 numeric tumor measurement features

The class balance was:

357 benign
212 malignant

That means the dataset is not perfectly balanced, but it is still usable without extreme class-imbalance fixes.

2. What the EDA notebook did

The EDA code had a few main jobs:

Data cleaning
read the CSV
removed the empty extra column if it existed
kept the useful tumor features
encoded diagnosis into numbers:
benign = 0
malignant = 1
Basic inspection

The code printed:

dataset shape
all column names
missing values
diagnosis counts
min, max, mean, and standard deviation for each numeric feature

This gave a full summary of the variable ranges and confirmed the dataset was clean.

Class balance plot

A countplot was used to show how many benign and malignant tumors were in the data.

Correlation with malignancy

The notebook computed the correlation of every feature with the encoded diagnosis variable. This helped identify which tumor measurements are most associated with malignancy.

Most important predictors from correlation

The strongest raw correlations with malignancy were:

concave points_worst
perimeter_worst
concave points_mean
radius_worst
perimeter_mean
area_worst
radius_mean
area_mean
concavity_mean
concavity_worst

This suggests that tumor size, boundary irregularity, and concavity-related variables are especially important in separating malignant from benign tumors.

Boxplots of top features

The code also created boxplots for the top correlated predictors, grouped by diagnosis. This visually showed that malignant tumors tend to have noticeably different values on the strongest variables.

L1 logistic regression / lasso-style feature selection

A logistic regression model with an L1 penalty was used to shrink weaker coefficients toward zero and keep only the more important predictors. This was useful because the dataset has many highly correlated features.

The strongest selected predictors from that step included:

radius_se
area_worst
radius_worst
texture_worst
concave points_worst
concavity_worst
concave points_mean

Some other features also remained, while many coefficients were shrunk to zero. That told us that only a subset of the 30 features may carry most of the predictive signal.

3. What the heatmap notebook did

The heatmap code computed the correlation matrix for all numeric variables and plotted it as a full heatmap.

Why this matters

The heatmap was important because this dataset has many features that are strongly related to each other. For example:

radius_mean, perimeter_mean, and area_mean are all closely related size measures
the “worst” versions of those variables are also strongly related
concavity and concave-points variables also cluster together
Main takeaway from the heatmap

The heatmap showed that:

many predictors are highly collinear
diagnosis has strong positive correlations with several size and boundary-irregularity features
using every variable naively may introduce redundancy

That is one reason why the lasso-style step was useful before or alongside modeling.

4. How the model works

The final model notebook built a feed-forward fully connected neural network using scikit-learn’s MLPClassifier.

Why this model was chosen

This is a tabular dataset, not an image dataset, so a fully connected network makes more sense than a CNN. The model learns nonlinear relationships between tumor measurements and the diagnosis label.

Preprocessing before training

The model code:

dropped id
dropped the empty extra column
converted diagnosis to 0/1
split the data into predictors X and target y
used a train/test split
80% train
20% test
stratified by diagnosis so class proportions stayed similar
standardized the predictors using StandardScaler
Why scaling was needed

The features are on very different numerical scales. For example, area can be in the hundreds or thousands, while smoothness is a small decimal. Standardization puts all inputs on a comparable scale so the neural network can train more effectively.

Network structure

The model used:

hidden layers: (32, 16)
activation: ReLU
optimizer: Adam
early stopping
validation fraction inside training

So conceptually:

the input layer receives the tumor measurements
the first hidden layer learns intermediate weighted combinations
the second hidden layer refines those learned patterns
the output predicts whether the tumor is malignant
What early stopping does

Early stopping prevents overtraining. If performance on the validation portion stops improving, training halts. That reduces overfitting, which matters because this is a relatively small dataset.

5. Model evaluation

The model was evaluated using:

AUC
confusion matrix
classification report
precision
recall
F1-score
accuracy
Actual results from the notebook
Test AUC: about 0.994
Confusion matrix:
TN = 71
FP = 1
FN = 5
TP = 37
Interpretation

This means:

the model did a very strong job separating benign and malignant tumors overall
it correctly identified almost all benign tumors
it missed a small number of malignant tumors
AUC near 0.99 indicates extremely strong ranking/separation ability
Important medical interpretation

The most important error type here is the false negative:

these are malignant tumors predicted as benign

The model only had 5 false negatives in the test set, which is fairly strong, but in a medical setting those errors are especially important and should be discussed.

6. Key talking points for the presentation

Your teammate could say something like this:

Slide-worthy summary
We began with exploratory data analysis to understand feature ranges, class balance, and missingness.
The dataset was clean and had 569 observations with 30 tumor-measurement predictors.
Correlation analysis showed that features related to tumor size and irregularity were strongly associated with malignancy.
A lasso-style logistic regression helped identify a smaller set of especially important predictors while dealing with collinearity.
A full heatmap showed that many predictors are highly correlated, which supports the need for careful feature interpretation.
We then trained a fully connected neural network using standardized inputs and a two-hidden-layer architecture.
The final model performed very well, achieving an AUC of about 0.994 with only a small number of misclassifications.
7. Important functions and what they do

Here are the main functions/classes your teammate may want to mention:

In the EDA code
pd.read_csv(...)
loads the dataset
df.drop(...)
removes unused columns like id or the empty extra column
map({"B":0,"M":1})
converts diagnosis into numeric form
agg(["min","max","mean","std"])
gives summary statistics
corr(...)
measures linear association between features
sns.countplot(...)
shows class balance
sns.boxplot(...)
compares feature distributions by class
In the feature-selection step
StandardScaler()
standardizes predictors
LogisticRegression(penalty="l1", solver="liblinear")
performs lasso-style feature selection for a binary classification setting
In the heatmap code
df.corr(numeric_only=True)
builds the full correlation matrix
sns.heatmap(...)
visualizes the correlation structure
In the model code
train_test_split(...)
separates train and test data
StandardScaler()
scales training and test features
MLPClassifier(...)
builds the neural-network classifier
roc_auc_score(...)
computes AUC
confusion_matrix(...)
shows the classification error breakdown
classification_report(...)
gives precision, recall, F1, and accuracy
